                        
                        Priority Landscape Stories
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
                        
                        
                            October 23, 2022
                        
                    
                    
                    
                    
                
                    
                
The Nature Conservancy envisions a healthy, connected and resilient Amazon Basin where biodiversity and freshwater ecosystems, and their contribution to people, are maintained, improved, and protected.
The 34 million people who live in the Amazon basin rely on fish as a primary source of food and income. A loss of any species would be devastating. Changing the flow and connectivity of rivers means lose the Amazon as we know today.
From the Amazon River headwaters high in the Andes mountains to the river’s mouth at the Atlantic Ocean—and back again—the Dorado catfish (Brachyplatystoma rousseauxii) records the longest migration of any freshwater fish in the world. Watch An Epic Journey to follow the catfish’s 11,000 km roundtrip journey and discover the importance of conserving the Amazon River for nature and people.
Through the lens of the Dorado catfish, the documentary explores the importance of protecting the Amazon River for its unparalleled biodiversity and the Indigenous People and Local Communities that depend on it. Through interviews with leading scientists, conservationists and local community members, the film explores:
Protecting the free-flowing river of the Amazon is vital. Without it, millions of people will be left without drinking water, a source of protein from local fish, and their livelihoods.
The Amazon River originates in the Andean cordillera (or mountains) 6,600 meters above sea level. It gathers water from seven nations (Ecuador, Colombia, Brazil, Bolivia, Peru, Venezuela, and Guyana) before reaching the Atlantic Ocean. There are more than 2,700 known fish species in the Amazon Basin (1,900 of which are endemic), which amounts to roughly 8% of the world's fish species. Roughly 35 new species are described every year at an average of one every 10 days.
More than just it’s amazing diversity of life, the Amazon River is a life source for more than 47 million people living on its riverbanks and throughout its basin. Nearly 2.2 million Indigenous People, representing more than 400 different ethnic groups, call the basin home. For many, fish from the river is their main source of protein. A single person may consume close to 500g of fish every day in certain communities. Importantly, the river itself and the animals living in it are revered in local cultures.
But the health of the Amazon River is under threat. Hydroelectric dams, invasive species and pollution continue to degrade its waters. Deforestation and conversion to agriculture, mining, urban sprawl and other stresses affect the flow and quality of water entering the river, too.
To conserve the Amazon River basin, we must address these different and connected challenges—and fast.
Indigenous People and Local Communities (IPLC) living along the length of the Amazon River play an important role in its stewardship and will be key to its future sustainability. Indigenous territories (ITs) and protected areas (PAs) cover around 50% of the Amazon basin. IPLC actions can protect the river from terrestrial threats and ensure the health of threatened aquatic ecosystems. Elevating their tenure and role as natural stewards of the environment and its living resources are critical elements of TNC’s Amazon-wide conservation effort.
          A new initiative aims to support Indigenous stewardship—key to protecting one of Earth’s largest watersheds.
          From Colombia, Brazil and Ecuador, different voices stress the importance of protecting Indigenous traditions and the Amazon ecosystem they depend on in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic.
          Striking a balance between economic output and environmental stewardship represents one of the greatest challenges for preserving the Amazon.
                Please provide valid email address
                You’ve already signed up with this email address. To review your email preferences, please visit nature.org/emailpreferences
                We may have detected a typo. 
                Please enter a valid email address (formatted as name@company.com).
                Did you mean to type 
                    ?
                
                    Please provide valid mobile number
                
                    See Mobile Terms & Conditions
                
          The Nature Conservancy is a nonprofit, tax-exempt charitable organization (tax identification number 53-0242652) under Section 501(c)(3) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code. Donations are tax-deductible as allowed by law. Global sites represent either regional branches of The Nature Conservancy or local affiliates of The Nature Conservancy that are separate entities. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
            © 2023 The Nature Conservancy
            Terms of Use
             | 
             | 
            Charitable Solicitation Disclosures
             | 
            Mobile Terms & Conditions
             | 
            Title VI Notice of Nondiscrimination
             | 
 This website uses cookies to enhance your experience and analyze performance and traffic on our website.